[FLINK-12277][table/hive/doc] Add documentation for catalogs (#8976)
apache/flink: docs/dev/table/catalog.md

```
select * from mydb2.myTable
```

`CatalogManager` always has a built-in `GenericInMemoryCatalog` with name of `default_catalog`, which has a built-in default database named `default_database`. They will be the current catalog and current database if no other catalog and database are explicitly set. All temp meta-objects will be registered to this catalog. Users can set current catalog and database via `TableEnvironment.useCatalog(...)` and `TableEnvironment.useDatabase(...)` in Table API, or `USE CATALOG ...` and `USE DATABASE ...` in Flink SQL.

Catalog Types
-------------

## GenericInMemoryCatalog

All meta-objects in this catalog are stored in memory, and be will lost once the session shuts down.

Its config entry value in SQL CLI yaml file is "generic_in_memory".

## HiveCatalog

`HiveCatalog` can read and write both Flink and Hive meta-objects by using Hive Metastore as a persistent storage.

Its config entry value in SQL CLI yaml file is "hive".

### Persist Flink meta-objects

Previously, Flink meta-objects are only stored in memory and are per session based. That means users have to recreate all the meta-objects every time they start a new session.

> To solve this user pain point, we use `HiveCatalog` to persist all of users' Flink streaming and batch meta-objects by using Hive Metastore as a pure storage. Because Hive Metastore is only used for storage in this case, Hive itself may not understand Flink's meta-objects stored in the metastore.

Reviewer: I think use HiveCatalog to store flink meta-objects is optional, up to user's choice. Thus, it may make sense to see "one can use ..." rather than "we use ...".

To register catalog in Table API, users can just create catalog instances and register them through `TableEnvironment.registerCatalog(name, catalog)`.

This applies to both pre-defined catalogs and users' customized catalogs.

## Register Catalog in SQL CLI

To use pre-defined catalogs (`GenericInMemoryCatalog` and `HiveCatalog`) in SQL CLI, please refer to [SQL Clinet]({{ site.baseurl }}/dev/table/sqlClient.html)

To use custom catalog in SQL CLI, users should develop both a catalog implementation and its corresponding catalog factory which implements `CatalogFactory` interface, as well as defining a set of properties for the catalog to be configured in SQL CLI yaml file. When SQL CLI bootstraps, it will read the configured properties and pass them into a discovery service where the service tries to match the properties to a `CatalogFactory` and initiate an corresponding catalog instance.

{% top %}

Catalog Module
--------------

`GenericInMemoryCatalog` is built in `flink-table` module.

In order to use Hive-metastore-backed catalogs in Flink, users need to include `flink-connector-hive` jar in their projects.

{% highlight xml %}
<dependency>

> 	<groupId>com.alibaba.blink</groupId>

Reviewer: blink or flink?

{% endhighlight %}
</div>

<div data-lang="scala" markdown="1">
{% highlight scala %}
//  ------ Register HiveCatalog ------
val tEnv = ...

// Register with Hive conf dir
tEnv.registerCatalog(new HiveCatalog("myHive1", hiveConfDir));

tEnv.listCatalogs();

// ------ Set default catalog and database ------

tEnv.useCatalog("myHive1")
tEnv.useDatabase("myDb");

// ------ Access Hive meta-objects ------

// First get the catalog
val myHive1 = tEnv.getCatalog("myHive1");

// Then read Hive meta-objects
myHive1.listDatabases();
myHive1.listTables("myDb");
myHive1.listViews("myDb");

val myTablePath = ew ObjectPath("myDb", "myTable");
myHive1.getTable(myTablePath);
myHive1.listPartitions(myTablePath);

......

{% endhighlight %}
</div>
</div>

## Use HiveCatalog in Flink SQL Cli

Users can specify catalogs in the yaml config file of Flink SQL CLI. See [SQL Cli]({{ site.baseurl }}/dev/table/sqlClient.html) for more details.

```yaml
catalogs:
   - name: myHive1
     type: hive
     hive-conf-dir: ...
   - name: myHive2
     type: hive
     hive-conf-dir: ...
     default-database: ...
```

To run a few example SQL commands to access a Hive table.

```sql
Flink SQL> show catalogs;

> myHive1

Reviewer: Does the built-in in-memory catalog show up here?

"License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
software distributed under the License is distributed on an
"AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations
under the License.
-->

A catalog can provide information about metadata, such as names, schemas, statistics of tables, and information about how to access data stored in a database or table. Once a catalog is registered to a `TableEnvironment`, all meta-objects defined in a catalog can be accessed from Table API or SQL queries.

* This will be replaced by the TOC
{:toc}

Catalog Interface
-----------------

APIs are defined in `Catalog` interface. The interface defines a set of APIs to read and write catalog meta-objects such as database, tables, partitions, views, and functions.

Users can develop their own catalogs by implementing the interface.

Naming Structure in Catalog
---------------------------

> Flink's catalogs use a strict two-level structure, that is, catalogs contain databases, and databases contain meta-objects. Thus, the full name of a meta-object is always structured as `catalogName`.`databaseName`.`objectName`.

Author: I'm not sure about this suggestion. `Thus` better indicates the causal relationship here.

> All registered catalogs are managed by a `CatalogManager` instance in `TableEnvironment`. In order to ease access to meta-objects, `CatalogManager` has a concept of current catalog and current database. Usually how users access meta-objects in a catalog is to specify its full name in the format of `catalogName`.`databaseName`.`objectName`. By setting current catalog and current database, users can use just the meta-object's name in their queries. This greatly simplifies user experience. For example, a previous query as

Author: I rephrased the sentence in another way

```sql
select * from mycatalog.mydb.myTable;
```

can be shortened as

```sql
select * from myTable;
```

> Querying tables in a different databases under the default catalog would be

Author: the point here is that users don't need to specify catalog name, just database name and table name.

```
select * from mydb2.myTable
```

> `CatalogManager` always has a built-in `GenericInMemoryCatalog` with name of `default_catalog`, which has a built-in default database named `default_database`. They will be the current catalog and current database if no other catalog and database are explicitly set. All temp meta-objects will be registered to this catalog. Users can set current catalog and database via `TableEnvironment.useCatalog(...)` and `TableEnvironment.useDatabase(...)` in Table API, or `USE CATALOG ...` and `USE DATABASE ...` in Flink SQL.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `CatalogManager` always has a built-in `GenericInMemoryCatalog` named `default_catalog`, which has a built-in default database named `default_database`. By default, these are the current catalog and database.  All temporary meta-objects, such as those defined by `TableEnvironment#registerTable`  are registered to this catalog. Users can set the current catalog and database via `TableEnvironment.useCatalog(...)` and `TableEnvironment.useDatabase(...)` in the Table API, or `USE CATALOG ...` and `USE DATABASE ...` in Flink SQL.
```

Author: I rephrased the sentence

Catalog Types
-------------

## GenericInMemoryCatalog

> All meta-objects in this catalog are stored in memory, and be will lost once the session shuts down.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The default catalog; all meta-objects are stored in memory, and be will be lost once the session shuts down.
```

Its config entry value in SQL CLI yaml file is "generic_in_memory".

## HiveCatalog

> `HiveCatalog` can read and write both Flink and Hive meta-objects by using Hive Metastore as a persistent storage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Flink's `HiveCatalog` can read and write both Flink and Hive meta-objects using Hive Metastore as persistent storage.
```

Its config entry value in SQL CLI yaml file is "hive".

### Persist Flink meta-objects

> Previously, Flink meta-objects are only stored in memory and are per session based. That means users have to recreate all the meta-objects every time they start a new session.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Historically, Flink meta-objects are only stored in memory and are per session based. That means users have to recreate all the meta-objects every time they start a new session.
```

> To solve this user pain point, users can choose the option to use `HiveCatalog` to persist all of users' Flink streaming and batch meta-objects by using Hive Metastore as a pure storage. Because Hive Metastore is only used for storage in this case, Hive itself may not understand Flink's meta-objects stored in the metastore.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To maintain meta-objects across sessions, users can choose to use the `HiveCatalog` to persist all of users' Flink streaming and batch meta-objects. Because Hive Metastore is only used for storage, Hive itself may not understand Flink's meta-objects stored in the metastore.
```

### Integrate Flink with Hive metadata

The ultimate goal for integrating Flink with Hive metadata is that:

> 1. existing meta-objects, like tables, views, and functions, created by Hive or other Hive-compatible applications can be used by Flink

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Flink can use existing meta-objects, like tables, views, and functions, created by Hive or other Hive-compatible applications
```

> 2. meta-objects created by `HiveCatalog` can be written back to Hive metastore such that Hive and other Hive-compatibile applications can consume.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Meta-objects created by `HiveCatalog` can be written back to Hive metastore such that Hive and other Hive-compatible applications can consume.
```

## User-configured Catalog

> Catalogs are pluggable, and users can use their own, customized catalog implementations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Users can develop custom catalogs by implementing the `Catalog` interface, which defines a set of APIs for reading and writing catalog meta-objects such as database, tables, partitions, views, and functions.
```

HiveCatalog
-----------

## Supported Hive Versions

> `HiveCatalog` officially supports Hive 2.3.4 and 1.2.1, and depends on Hive's own compatibility for the other 2.x.x and 1.x.x versions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Flink's `HiveCatalog` officially supports Hive 2.3.4 and 1.2.1, and depends on Hive's compatibility guarantees for the other 2.x.x and 1.x.x versions.
```

> Users need to explicitly specify the Hive version as string, by either passing it to the constructor when creating `HiveCatalog` instances directly in Table API or specifying it in yaml config file in SQL CLI. The Hive version string will be either `2.3.4`, `1.2.1`, or your own 2.x.x/1.x.x versions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Hive version is explicitly specified as a String; either by passing it to the constructor when creating `HiveCatalog` instances directly in Table API or specifying it in yaml config file in SQL CLI. The Hive version string is either `2.3.4`, `1.2.1`, or your own 2.x.x/1.x.x versions..
```

> Users need to explicitly specify the Hive version as string, by either passing it to the constructor when creating `HiveCatalog` instances directly in Table API or specifying it in yaml config file in SQL CLI. The Hive version string will be either `2.3.4`, `1.2.1`, or your own 2.x.x/1.x.x versions.

Reviewer 3: Shall we mention that only 2.3.4 and 1.2.1 are supported at the moment? E.g. if user is using 1.2.0, he still needs to specify the version as 1.2.1, otherwise `HiveShimLoader` will error out complaining about unsupported hive version

Author: I'll remove this part for now. Maybe you can add some more details to the doc w.r.t shim once this PR is merged?

Reviewer 3: Sure

## Dependencies

> In order to use `HiveCatalog`, users need to either downloading the following dependency jars and adding them to the `/lib` dir in Flink distribution, or adding their existing Hive jars to Flink's classpath in order for Flink to find them at runtime.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use `HiveCatalog`, users need to either downloading the following dependency jars and adding them to the `/lib` dir in Flink distribution, or adding their existing Hive jars to Flink's classpath for Flink to find them at runtime.
```

> In order to use `HiveCatalog`, users need to either downloading the following dependency jars and adding them to the `/lib` dir in Flink distribution, or adding their existing Hive jars to Flink's classpath in order for Flink to find them at runtime.

Reviewer 3: If users want to use HiveCatalog, they must have a Hive installation to setup HMS, which means they have the Hive jars at hand. So I'm not sure when/why should they download Hive jars?

Author: I rephrased it

> Take Hive 2.3.4 for example:

Reviewer 4: Can we provide download links for the dependencies?

Author: good idea

```
// Hive dependencies

> - hive-metastore-2.3.4.jar

Reviewer 3: Is hive-metastore.jar needed? I thought it's included in hive-exec.jar

Reviewer 3: Just quickly checked Hive code and it turned out hive-metastore is included in hive-exec in Hive-2.3.4 but not in Hive-1.2.1. So I think we need separated sections for the required Hive dependencies for different versions.

- hive-exec-2.3.4.jar

// Hadoop dependencies
- flink-shaded-hadoop-2-uber-2.7.5-1.8.0.jar
- flink-hadoop-compatibility-{{site.version}}.jar

```

> Note that users need to make sure the compatibility between their Hive versions and hadoop versions. Otherwise, there may be potential problem, for example, Hive 2.3.4 is compiled against Hadoop 2.7.2, you may run into problems when using Hive 2.3.4 with Hadoop 2.4.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that users need to make sure the compatibility between their Hive versions and Hadoop versions. Otherwise, there may be a potential problem; for example, Hive 2.3.4 is compiled against Hadoop 2.7.2, you may run into problems when using Hive 2.3.4 with Hadoop 2.4.
```

## Data Type Mapping

> For both Flink and Hive tables, `HiveCatalog` stores column types in schema by mapping them to Hive data types. Upon reading tables, `HiveCatalog` maps them back.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For both Flink and Hive tables, `HiveCatalog` store's column schemas by mapping them to Hive data types. Types are dynamically mapped back on read.
```

Author: I rephrased the sentence

Currently `HiveCatalog` supports most Flink data types with the following mapping:

|  Flink Data Type  |  Hive Data Type  |
|---|---|
| CHAR(p)       |  char(p)* |
| VARCHAR(p)    |  varchar(p)** |
| STRING        |  string |
| BOOLEAN       |  boolean |
| BYTE          |  tinyint |
| SHORT         |  smallint |
| INT           |  int |
| BIGINT        |  long |
| FLOAT         |  float |
| DOUBLE        |  double |
| DECIMAL(p, s) |  decimal(p, s) |
| DATE          |  date |
| TIMESTAMP_WITHOUT_TIME_ZONE |  Timestamp |
| TIMESTAMP_WITH_TIME_ZONE |  N/A |
| TIMESTAMP_WITH_LOCAL_TIME_ZONE |  N/A |
| INTERVAL |  N/A |
| BINARY        |  binary |
| VARBINARY(p)  |  binary |
| ARRAY\<E>     |  list\<E> |
| MAP<K, V>     |  map<K, V> |
| ROW           |  struct |
| MULTISET      |  N/A |

Note that we only covers most commonly used data types for now.

> The following limitations in Hive's data types that will impact the mapping between Flink and Hive if you choose to use `HiveCatalog`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following limitations in Hive's data types impact the mapping between Flink and Hive:
```

> \* maximum length is 255

Reviewer 2: Its unclear to me what limitations are.

\** maximum length is 65535

## Hive Compatibility

For Hive compatibility and versions, see [Hive Compatibility]({{ site.baseurl }}/dev/batch/hive_compatibility.html)

Catalog Registration
--------------------

## Register Catalog in Table API

> To register catalog in Table API, users can just create catalog instances and register them through `TableEnvironment.registerCatalog(name, catalog)`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To register a catalog in Table API, users can create catalog instances and register them through `TableEnvironment.registerCatalog(name, catalog)`.
```

> This applies to both pre-defined catalogs and users' customized catalogs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

This sentence doesn't add anything, please delete.

## Register Catalog in SQL CLI

To use pre-defined catalogs (`GenericInMemoryCatalog` and `HiveCatalog`) in SQL CLI, please refer to [SQL Clinet]({{ site.baseurl }}/dev/table/sqlClient.html)

> To use custom catalog in SQL CLI, users should develop both a catalog implementation and its corresponding catalog factory which implements `CatalogFactory` interface, as well as defining a set of properties for the catalog to be configured in SQL CLI yaml file. When SQL CLI bootstraps, it will read the configured properties and pass them into a discovery service where the service tries to match the properties to a `CatalogFactory` and initiate an corresponding catalog instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using custom catalogs in SQL CLI, users should develop both a catalog implementation and its corresponding catalog factory implementing the `CatalogFactory` interface, as well as defining a set of properties for the catalog to be configured in SQL CLI yaml file. When SQL CLI bootstraps, it reads the configured properties and passes them into a discovery service where the service tries to match the properties to a `CatalogFactory` and initiate a corresponding catalog instance.
```

Author: I rephrased it

{% top %}

Catalog Modules
---------------

> `GenericInMemoryCatalog` is built in Flink's Table API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`GenericInMemoryCatalog` is built into Flink's Table API.
```

> In order to use `HiveCatalog` in Flink Table API and SQL, users need to include `flink-connector-hive` jar in their projects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use `HiveCatalog` in Flink Table API and SQL, users need to include `flink-connector-hive` jar in their projects.
```

{% highlight xml %}
<dependency>
	<groupId>org.apache.flink</groupId>
	<artifactId>flink-connector-hive_{{ site.scala_version_suffix }}</artifactId>
	<version>{{site.version}}</version>
</dependency>
{% endhighlight %}

Use Catalog
-----------

> We will use `HiveCatalog` for example in the following content.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

This sentence doesn't add anything, please remove

myHive1.getTable(myTablePath);
myHive1.listPartitions(myTablePath);

......

{% endhighlight %}
</div>

<div data-lang="scala" markdown="1">
{% highlight scala %}
//  ------ Register HiveCatalog ------
val tEnv = ...

// Register with Hive conf dir
tEnv.registerCatalog(new HiveCatalog("myHive1", hiveConfDir));

tEnv.listCatalogs();

// ------ Set default catalog and database ------

tEnv.useCatalog("myHive1")
tEnv.useDatabase("myDb");

// ------ Access Hive meta-objects ------

// First get the catalog
val myHive1 = tEnv.getCatalog("myHive1");

// Then read Hive meta-objects
myHive1.listDatabases();
myHive1.listTables("myDb");
myHive1.listViews("myDb");

val myTablePath = ew ObjectPath("myDb", "myTable");
myHive1.getTable(myTablePath);
myHive1.listPartitions(myTablePath);

......

{% endhighlight %}
</div>
</div>

## Use HiveCatalog in Flink SQL Cli

Users can specify catalogs in the yaml config file of Flink SQL CLI. See [SQL Cli]({{ site.baseurl }}/dev/table/sqlClient.html) for more details.

```yaml
catalogs:
   - name: myHive1
     type: hive
     hive-conf-dir: ...
   - name: myHive2
     type: hive
     hive-conf-dir: ...
     default-database: ...
```

> To run a few example SQL commands to access a Hive table.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And below are a few example SQL commands to access a Hive table.
```

## Data Type Mapping

For both Flink and Hive tables, `HiveCatalog` stores table schemas by mapping them to Hive table schemas with Hive data types. Types are dynamically mapped back on read.

Currently `HiveCatalog` supports most Flink data types with the following mapping:

|  Flink Data Type  |  Hive Data Type  |
|---|---|
| CHAR(p)       |  char(p)* |
| VARCHAR(p)    |  varchar(p)** |
| STRING        |  string |
| BOOLEAN       |  boolean |
| BYTE          |  tinyint |
| SHORT         |  smallint |
| INT           |  int |
| BIGINT        |  long |
| FLOAT         |  float |
| DOUBLE        |  double |
| DECIMAL(p, s) |  decimal(p, s) |
| DATE          |  date |
| TIMESTAMP_WITHOUT_TIME_ZONE |  Timestamp |
| TIMESTAMP_WITH_TIME_ZONE |  N/A |
| TIMESTAMP_WITH_LOCAL_TIME_ZONE |  N/A |
| INTERVAL |  N/A |
| BINARY        |  binary |
| VARBINARY(p)  |  binary |
| ARRAY\<E>     |  list\<E> |
| MAP<K, V>     |  map<K, V> |
| ROW           |  struct |
| MULTISET      |  N/A |

> Note that we only covers most commonly used data types for now.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that we only cover the most commonly used data types for now.
```

The following limitations in Hive's data types impact the mapping between Flink and Hive:

\* maximum length is 255

\** maximum length is 65535

## Hive Compatibility

For Hive compatibility and versions, see [Hive Compatibility]({{ site.baseurl }}/dev/batch/hive_compatibility.html)

Catalog Registration
--------------------

## Register Catalog in Table API

To register a catalog in Table API, users can create a catalog instance and register it through `TableEnvironment.registerCatalog(name, catalog)`.

## Register Catalog in SQL CLI

> To use pre-defined catalogs (`GenericInMemoryCatalog` and `HiveCatalog`) in SQL CLI, please refer to [SQL Clinet]({{ site.baseurl }}/dev/table/sqlClient.html)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use pre-defined catalogs (`GenericInMemoryCatalog` and `HiveCatalog`) in the SQL CLI, please refer to its [documentation]({{ site.baseurl }}/dev/table/sqlClient.html).
```

Author: using `[<doc_name>]` seems to be a common practice in Flink doc.

> To use custom catalog in SQL CLI, users should develop both a catalog and its corresponding catalog factory by implementing `Catalog` and `CatalogFactory` interfaces respectively.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use a custom catalog in the SQL CLI, users should develop both a catalog and its corresponding catalog factory by implementing `Catalog` and `CatalogFactory` interfaces respectively.
```

> The catalog factory defines a set of properties for configuring the catalog when SQL CLI bootstraps. The set of properties will be passed to a discovery service where the service tries to match the properties to a `CatalogFactory` and initiate an corresponding catalog instance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The catalog factory defines a set of properties for configuring the catalog when the SQL CLI bootstraps. The set of properties will be passed to a discovery service where the service tries to match the properties to a `CatalogFactory` and initiate an corresponding catalog instance.
```

Author: we don't need to add 'the' to every 'SQL CLI'

tEnv.useDatabase("myDb");

// ------ Access Hive meta-objects ------

// First get the catalog
Catalog myHive1 = tEnv.getCatalog("myHive1");

// Then read Hive meta-objects
myHive1.listDatabases();
myHive1.listTables("myDb");
myHive1.listViews("myDb");

ObjectPath myTablePath = new ObjectPath("myDb", "myTable");
myHive1.getTable(myTablePath);
myHive1.listPartitions(myTablePath);

......

{% endhighlight %}
</div>

<div data-lang="scala" markdown="1">
{% highlight scala %}
//  ------ Register HiveCatalog ------
val tEnv = ...

// Register with Hive conf dir
tEnv.registerCatalog(new HiveCatalog("myHive1", hiveConfDir));

tEnv.listCatalogs();

// ------ Set default catalog and database ------

tEnv.useCatalog("myHive1")
tEnv.useDatabase("myDb");

// ------ Access Hive meta-objects ------

// First get the catalog
val myHive1 = tEnv.getCatalog("myHive1");

// Then read Hive meta-objects
myHive1.listDatabases();
myHive1.listTables("myDb");
myHive1.listViews("myDb");

val myTablePath = ew ObjectPath("myDb", "myTable");
myHive1.getTable(myTablePath);
myHive1.listPartitions(myTablePath);

......

{% endhighlight %}
</div>
</div>

## Use HiveCatalog in Flink SQL Cli

> Users can specify catalogs in the yaml config file of Flink SQL CLI. See [SQL Cli]({{ site.baseurl }}/dev/table/sqlClient.html) for more details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Users can specify catalogs in the yaml config file of Flink’s SQL CLI. See [SQL Cli]({{ site.baseurl }}/dev/table/sqlClient.html) for more details.
```
